---
title: "Foundations of Reality"
author: "Sebastian Yaghoubi"
date: 2022-05-28
summary:
  "An exploration of the philosophical theories surrounding the nature of
  reality and consciousness, examining monism, dualism, and alternative
  perspectives."
tags: ["philosophy", "reality", "ontology", academic"]
keywords:
  [
    "reality",
    "consciousness",
    "ontology",
    "philosophy",
    "monism",
    "dualism",
    "eliminativism",
    "panpsychism",
    "mysterianism",
  ]
---

## Abstract

This paper examines fundamental ontological questions about the nature of
reality and consciousness. Through analysis of competing philosophical
frameworks, primarily monism and dualism, it explores how consciousness may be
situated within reality and evaluates the strengths and limitations of each
theoretical approach. The investigation extends to contemporary perspectives
including eliminativism, panpsychism, and mysterianism to provide a
comprehensive assessment of how we might understand the foundations of reality.
This paper aims to demonstrate that while definitive answers remain elusive, the
inquiry itself offers valuable insights into how we perceive and understand
existence.

_Keywords_: reality, consciousness, ontology, philosophy, monism, dualism

## Foundations of Reality

## Introduction

One of the fundamental questions in both philosophy and science is "what is
real?" The field of ontology, a branch of metaphysics, addresses this question
by examining the nature of reality and existence. Through ontology, we can
explore critical questions about the source of reality and how we might
substantiate our claims about it.

A central challenge in studying reality is determining the "location" of
consciousness, what is commonly known as the mind-body problem. This problem
investigates whether consciousness resides primarily in the mental or physical
domain. While numerous theories attempt to resolve this dichotomy, philosophy
faces an inherent limitation: metaphysical propositions often resist
quantifiable verification. Given this constraint, a methodical approach involves
evaluating competing theories on their merits to develop a coherent
understanding based on cumulative philosophical insights. Through this process,
we can better investigate whether reality and consciousness exist as physical
entities, mental phenomena, or some combination thereof.

## Theoretical Frameworks: Monism and Dualism

### The Monist Perspective

Monism holds that reality consists of a single fundamental substance or
principle. In the context of consciousness, monists argue that mental and
physical phenomena derive from the same underlying reality (Schaffer). This
perspective eliminates the need to explain how distinct substances might
interact, offering a more parsimonious explanation of consciousness.

#### Physicalism

Physicalism represents a prominent monist theory asserting that mental states
are ultimately physical in nature. According to this view, consciousness emerges
from the neurobiological processes of the brain. The distinctive features of
consciousness, including subjective experiences and intentionality, are
explained as products of particular physical arrangements and processes
(Stoljar).

The physicalist account maintains that modifying the underlying physical or
biological structures would necessarily alter consciousness. This perspective
aligns with scientific materialism and offers the advantage of methodological
continuity with the natural sciences. However, physicalism struggles to explain
how purely physical processes give rise to subjective experience --- what
philosopher David Chalmers terms the "hard problem of consciousness."

#### Non-reductive Physicalism

Non-reductive physicalism attempts to navigate this difficulty by maintaining
that while mental states are physically instantiated, they cannot be reduced to
or fully explained in physical terms. This position acknowledges the physical
basis of consciousness while preserving the integrity and causal efficacy of
mental phenomena. Mental properties, on this view, supervene on physical
properties but maintain a degree of autonomy.

### The Dualist Alternative

In contrast to monism, dualism posits that reality comprises two fundamentally
distinct substances: the physical and the mental (Robinson). This theoretical
framework addresses the apparent irreducibility of consciousness to physical
processes by placing it in a separate ontological category.

#### Cartesian Dualism

Rene Descartes advanced an influential form of substance dualism. In his
"Meditations" Descartes employs methodical doubt to question everything that can
be doubted, including the reliability of sensory perception. He notes that while
dreaming, one cannot distinguish the dream state from wakefulness (Descartes).
This observation reveals the possibility that our perceived reality may exist
independently of physical interaction.

Descartes concludes that while he can doubt the existence of the physical world,
he cannot doubt his own thinking, "cogito, ergo sum" (I think, therefore I am).
This leads him to posit a fundamental distinction between the thinking mind (res
cogitans) and the extended physical world (res extensa). This distinction forms
the basis for his dualistic understanding of reality.

#### Perceptual Idealism

George Berkeley takes the dualist insight further by arguing that reality exists
solely through perception. According to Berkeley, since we apprehend physical
reality only through mental perception, and cannot access reality independently
of consciousness, the mental domain must be primary. His famous dictum "esse est
percipi" (to be is to be perceived) suggests that material objects exist only as
perceptions in minds (Berkeley). This represents a form of idealism that
privileges the mental substance over the physical.

#### Interactionism and the Interface Problem

A persistent challenge for dualist theories is explaining how the mental and
physical substances interact, known as the interface problem. If consciousness
exists in a non-physical realm, how does it causally influence the physical
brain and body? Conversely, how do physical events affect the non-physical mind?
This explanatory gap represents a significant theoretical hurdle for dualist
accounts.

## Contemporary Perspectives

### Functionalism and Multiple Realizability

Daniel Dennett offers a functionalist account of consciousness that focuses on
the functional role of mental states rather than their physical substrate. In
his thought experiment "Where Am I?", Dennett explores how consciousness might
be replicated or transferred to different physical media, such as computers
(Dennett).

This perspective suggests that consciousness depends on information processing
patterns rather than specific physical compositions. However, Dennett's example
still requires some physical implementation for consciousness to exist, which
some interpret as support for a sophisticated form of physicalism. The
functionalist approach introduces the concept of multiple realizability, which
is the idea that mental states can be instantiated in different physical systems
provided they maintain the appropriate functional organization.

### Eliminativism: Questioning the Concepts

Eliminativism challenges the very framework of the mind-body problem by arguing
that our folk psychological concepts of consciousness and mental states are
fundamentally flawed. Proponents of this view contend that consciousness is not
a coherent entity requiring explanation but rather a conceptual construct that
will eventually be replaced by more precise neuroscientific descriptions
(Tomasik).

This perspective distinguishes between observed reality (our subjective
experience) and absolute reality (the objective world independent of
observation). According to eliminativists, what we call consciousness is simply
the brain's interpretation of its own processes --- a useful fiction rather than
an ontological reality requiring special explanation.

### Panpsychism: Consciousness All the Way Down

Panpsychism proposes that consciousness or mind-like qualities are fundamental
features of reality that exist throughout the physical world, not just in brains
or biological systems (Skrbina). This theory addresses the emergence problem of
how consciousness could arise from entirely non-conscious components by
suggesting that consciousness doesn't emerge at all but exists as a basic
property of matter.

Historical precedents for panpsychist thinking appear across diverse cultural
traditions, from the Asian concepts of "Qi" in Buddhism and "Kami" in Shinto to
the Native American notion of "Great Spirit" and the African concept of "Mana"
(Parkes). Within Western philosophy, variations of panpsychism appear in the
works of Plato, Leibniz, William James, and more recently, Bertrand Russell.

Contemporary versions of panpsychism attempt to reconcile this ancient intuition
with modern scientific understanding. For instance, integrated information
theory (developed by Giulio Tononi) proposes that consciousness correlates with
complex systems' capacity to integrate information, potentially extending
consciousness in varying degrees throughout nature.

### Mysterianism: The Limits of Understanding

Mysterianism takes a distinctive epistemic stance by arguing that the mind-body
problem exceeds human cognitive capabilities (McGinn). According to this view,
the subjective nature of consciousness, what Thomas Nagel described as the "what
it is like" quality of experience, makes it intrinsically resistant to objective
analysis.

Colin McGinn argues that the explanatory gap between physical processes and
subjective experience is unbridgeable given the structure of human cognition.
The qualitative aspects of experience (qualia) cannot be captured in
quantitative terms, making a comprehensive theory of consciousness perpetually
elusive. This position does not deny that consciousness has a natural
explanation but suggests that humans may be cognitively closed to discovering
it, much as a mouse cannot comprehend quantum physics.

## Implications and Significance

The diversity of theories concerning consciousness and reality raises an
important question: why does this philosophical inquiry matter? Understanding
how we conceptualize reality influences our approach to knowledge, ethics, and
scientific inquiry. If reality itself cannot be definitively characterized, how
should we regard the knowledge built upon this uncertain foundation?

The exploration of these metaphysical questions encourages intellectual humility
and openness to alternative perspectives. It demonstrates that even our most
basic assumptions about reality deserve critical examination. Moreover, these
philosophical considerations have practical implications for fields ranging from
artificial intelligence and cognitive science to medical ethics and law.

## Conclusion

The question of reality's foundations remains one of philosophy's most enduring
and challenging problems. While monism offers theoretical elegance through its
unified account of reality, it struggles to explain how physical processes
generate subjective experience. Dualism acknowledges the apparent
distinctiveness of consciousness but faces difficulties explaining the
interaction between mental and physical domains. Alternative perspectives like
eliminativism, panpsychism, and mysterianism offer valuable insights but come
with their own conceptual challenges.

This philosophical landscape reveals that our understanding of reality and
consciousness remains incomplete. Yet the very process of interrogating these
questions enriches our conceptual framework and reminds us of the provisional
nature of knowledge. In confronting the limitations of our understanding, we
gain valuable perspective on the complexity and wonder of existence itself.

As scientific investigation continues to advance our understanding of the brain
and cognitive processes, philosophical inquiry remains essential for
interpreting these findings within a broader conceptual framework. The dialogue
between empirical research and philosophical reflection offers the most
promising path toward a richer comprehension of reality's foundations.

## References

Berkeley, George. "To Be Is to Be Perceived." A Treatise Concerning the
Principles of Human Knowledge, 1710.

Chalmers, David J. "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." Journal of
Consciousness Studies, vol. 2, no. 3, 1995, pp. 200-219.

Dennett, Daniel C. "Where Am I?" The MIT Press, 1978,
<https://www.lehigh.edu/~mhb0/Dennett-WhereAmI.pdf/>.

Descartes, René, et al. "Meditations I and II." The Philosophical Works of
Descartes, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 1967.

McGinn, Colin. "Can We Solve the Mind--Body Problem?" Mind, vol. 98, no. 391,
1989, pp. 349–66. JSTOR, <http://www.jstor.org/stable/2254848>.

Nagel, Thomas. “What Is It Like to Be a Bat?” The Philosophical Review, vol. 83,
no. 4, 1974, pp. 435–50. JSTOR, <https://doi.org/10.2307/2183914>.

Parkes, Graham. "The Awareness of Rocks." Skrbina David, ed. Mind that Abides.
Chapter 17,
<https://grahamparkes.net/core/elfinder/files/pdf/E8-Parkes-The_Awareness_of_Rock.pdf/>.

Robinson, Howard, "Dualism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020
Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/dualism/>.

Schaffer, Jonathan, "Monism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter
2018 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/entries/monism/>.

Skrbina, David. "Panpsychism." Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
<https://iep.utm.edu/panpsych/>.

Stoljar, Daniel, "Physicalism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer
2022 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2022/entries/physicalism/>.

Tomasik, Brian. "The Eliminativist Approach to Consciousness." Center on
Long-Term Risk, 15 June 2020,
<https://longtermrisk.org/the-eliminativist-approach-to-consciousness/>.

Tononi, Giulio. "Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness: An Updated
Account." Archives Italiennes de Biologie, vol. 150, no. 4, 2012, pp. 293-329.
